>> Mike North: The last topic I wanna
talk to you about is tests for types.
Specifically, I want to focus
on writing negative test cases.
It's quite easy to write positive
test cases for type information.
And you could argue that the jest
tests we've already been writing
are positive test cases.
They have to compile
their TypeScript files.
And so we make sure that the things
that should compile properly do
compile properly.
But what about cases where we wanna say,
here's an example of something that
the types should catch for me.
This is a mistake that
should not be compilable.
It's important that we we have
those kinds of tests as well,
because sometimes bugs can happen where
types turn into enemies inappropriately.
We would say that's like
an inappropriate widening of types.
You lose your type safety and
of course all your tests compile like ne's
are perfectly happy to let a lot of
things compile, too many things.
So we'll go through an example of how
we can write some negative test cases.
There are two tools that I like using for
this, for
different reasons although one
is sort of very established and
not doing much and
the other is catching up.
So it may be that the second tool I'm
gonna talk to you about is sort of
the one that ends up winning.
But the first tool is called DTS lint.
And DTS is like a declaration file.
So where this is used most is
in the definitely typed repo.
All the tests for definitely typed
types are written to run in DTS lint.
So we're gonna go ahead and install it,
we still can use it locally and
there are some benefits but
that'll be the first thing that we try.
And the benefits there are that
it automatically downloads
different compiler versions and
tests them against your types.
So you could say, for example, this
should work in TypeScript version 3.4,
and it'll check out version 3.4,
3.5, .6, .7, .8, .9.
All the 4.x releases,
all the stable 5.x releases, and
it'll run your test file against each
one of those to give you confidence
that if you're publishing a library and
you wanna make sure that
whole range continues to work,
definitely typed is great for that.
Definitely typed also automatically
tests against nightly TypeScript builds.
So it's a great way to know if there's
sort of breakage headed on its way to you.
I have filed a lot of bug
reports against TypeScript that
before they ever affected
the apps that I was caring for.
And having a nightly build
to test against is great.
That's exactly what
Microsoft wants you to do.
It's part of keeping that
feedback loop nice and tight.
Although I said it isn't doing much,
meaning new features haven't been added in
a long time, Microsoft uses this heavily.
And it's so ingrained and definitely
types that I really can't imagine
how they would stop making
sure it continues to work.
>> Mike North: So, concerns with this,
it's very particular of how it's set up.
When you're testing,
you end up really making assertions
against stringified types.
So sometimes you're really writing
assertions in comments and
even just getting the spacing
between things wrong,
which would not really be important
in code, it'll still fail the test.
So you have to understand what its
conventions are and align with them.
>> Mike North: All right, the other
library that I like using is tsd.
And let's take a look at that.
So tsd is a much more modern project.
You can see there's a lot of
active contributors to it.
And the way they would help you,
they would have you write your tests
are really using types,
not magic comets where you are sort of
asserting that the stringfield type
matches a particular thing but
you can use generics to
write your assertion.
You are expecting the return type
of concat to be of type string.
So these types are easier to maintain,
they're a lot more flexible,
they're less likely to change
from version to version.
When we're talking about
stringified types,
sometimes TypeScript it'll just change
how they present a particular type.
Where one release they might,
when you say, the key of this interface,
they might enumerate all of the fields and
in the next they'll just say, I'm just
gonna call this key of the interface name,
and that that changes how you'd
have to write your assertion.
But this is much more flexible and
does not require the stringfield
type kind of thing.
So there are a couple of
different assertions you can make,
like expect assignable, expect error,
and it's quite well thought through.
>> Mike North: You can even assert that
things should remain deprecated so
you can catch if somebody tries to remove
a deprecation tag on a particular thing.
This is a great thing for asserting that
something handles a value exhaustively,
it was returning and never,
that means there's nothing left,
a lot of valuable things here.
So let's take a look at both.
So, we wrote this function, isTypedArray.
It was kind of an interesting type guard,
and we wanna make
sure that it works the way it's supposed
to work in different scenarios.
So, the first thing we're gonna have to do
is create a new folder
in our tests folder.
So we're gonna call it types/dtslint, and
we'll create a bunch of files in there,
these files above.
So I'm gonna go and
make that folder and chat tests.
>> Mike North: Make sure.
>> Mike North: Some of this is
gonna seem a little bit funky,
but that's just the way
it is with this package.
This is like this thing.
>> Mike North: Chat tests typesdtslint.
Okay, there we go.
So we're gonna get our tsconfig.json.
There's the contents of it.
I'm gonna grab that and move it over.
We have to fix the thing or
two, check it out together.
Okay, just making sure that this
is the right tsconfig.json.
I'm gonna Command click on it and
we get here.
That looks good.
>> Mike North: And then let's make
sure this source folder works.
So that would take us up one up one.
I think we need one more hop.
So this would take us into tests.
Nope, this should be good.
>> Mike North: All right, one more file
we have to add in there, tslint.json.
This is a linter that was
originally written for TypeScript.
It predates ESLint having
great TypeScript support.
It is far less popular
than ESLint right now.
I would advise that you use ESLint.
But DTSLint is built on top of this.
You don't get to make a choice here.
>> Mike North: So TSLint.
>> Mike North: Great,
>> Mike North: So
now what we're gonna do is we're
gonna create a declaration file.
>> Mike North: Now I'm actually gonna
open up a DefinitelyTyped repo.
It's a great reference to look at
when you're creating one of these.
>> Mike North: So
let's just do definitely.
Chai is fine.
>> Mike North: And
we'll look up at the top of this file.
>> Mike North: Actually,
we don't even need that special stuff
at the top of the file anymore.
Let's look at our package.json here and
make sure that we got everything we need.
Probably don't need the owners.
>> Mike North: Let's look
in this folder real quick.
>> Mike North: Just gonna check these out,
that seems fine, tsconfig.
>> Mike North: Seems fine,
enumerate files here, and
here's what the tests look like.
So let's give this a try.
We can maybe take advantage of references
that we have already available to us
in the outer tests folder.
So what we want here is something like,
>> Mike North: Like this
and,
>> Mike North: type-guards.
>> Mike North: isTypedArray.
>> Mike North: Great,
we have the function here.
>> Mike North: I don't actually think
we'll need the node types in here, so
we can probably just have
that be the first line.
Okay, and
now what I wanna do is I'm actually
gonna have to export this like that.
>> Mike North: I told you we'd
be doing some wacky stuff here.
>> Mike North: Okay,
now let's look back at the tests for chai.
So they've got chai-tests.
So we're gonna do chat-tests.d.ts.
>> Mike North: Part of why we're doing
this is dtslint wants sort of a root
declaration file that
represents the library.
So this is still here.
We're effectively
re-exporting that symbol.
Dtsflint wants to regard something as
sort of like where it can find the types,
like within this types-dtsflint folder.
>> Mike North: Let me see
if it's in the project.
>> Mike North: Okay, it's not here,
so we're gonna have to do.
Make sure I know where I am.
Yarn add -D dtslint.
>> Mike North: Cool.
>> Mike North: So what it's doing now, now
that I ran this command, yarn dtslint and
then the path to that folder we created,
you can see in the background it's
downloading a bunch of
different TypeScript versions.
It's gonna hold these in a cache called
.dts, which is great, because if you use
this across a bunch of projects, it's
not storing them on a per project basis.
If you use GitHub Actions,
this would be a great thing to cache.
And now, let's see,
it's taking issue with a bunch of
different stuff that's going on.
Errors in TypeScript 3 for
external dependencies.
>> Mike North: Why don't we just do this?
Why don't we just drop the type in here?
I would normally add this into the project
after we've sort of swatted away at a lot
of the strictness work, gone through
that full list of different things.
But we can do just fine this way.
>> Mike North: So there's our type.
>> Mike North: This is just quite a bit
of work that we would have to do between
where we're at and being able to regard,
>> Mike North: Being
able to get TSLint happy with this.
So isTypedArray, let's run this again.
>> Mike North: Still
giving us those errors?
>> Mike North: No,
we're not gonna include source.
That's how we can stop that.
It's just a totally different linter
with totally different rules.
Kinda have to kick this thing
a little bit until you get it to
where it wants to help you out.
>> Mike North: Okay, this is better.
So it's saying this file should
not end with a blank line.
Okay, that's pretty picky.
File should end with a new line.
>> Mike North: Just wanna get it into
a good baseline, then we can write a test.
>> Mike North: Did I not save things?
>> Mike North: New line here.
>> Mike North: I'll just start disabling
rules if this bugs us too much longer.
>> Mike North: Okay, this threw an error,
we're going to disable the rule.
>> Mike North: This is gonna convince
all you all to use TSD cuz the setup for
that is night and day compared to this.
Okay, we're in a working state now.
So in our test,
our chat-test, we could say,
>> Mike North: isTypedArray, and
we're going to pass in an unknown array,
and here we'll say toTest: unknown.
>> Mike North: Something like that.
>> Mike North: Sorry,
arrow functions index here.
>> Mike North: Let's break
this out as a separate value.
>> Mike North: Something like that.
>> Mike North: Fine,
if it really wants me to export it.
All right, here's the numberGuard.
isTypedArray.
Statements are not allowed
in ambient contexts.
>> Mike North: I wonder if I,
>> Mike North: Else, I'm still here.
This should be a ts file, not a dts file.
>> Mike North: That's important.
>> Mike North: And then this is gonna
complain about not being initialized,
which is fine.
And we can just say numberGuard.
>> Mike North: Returns that,
and we'll implement it, typeof,
there you go, toTest === 'number'.
So isTypedArray, we can see it returns
this type, arg is number array.
So we could do,
>> Mike North: Something like that,
and let's run dtslint,
see if it's happy, it's probably.
>> Mike North: We gotta return this.
>> Mike North: I'll cancel that,
cuz it won't be successful there.
>> Mike North: So I expect this to pass.
>> Mike North: Consecutive
blank lines are forbidden.
This is an example of not
having too many opinions.
Missing whitespace on line 8, comment must
start with a space,
file should end with a new line.
I would recommend turning
a lot of that stuff off,
cuz we're playing whack-a-mole here.
>> Mike North: Okay, TypeScript@5.3
expected type to be: arg is number[] and
got: boolean.
>> Mike North: So this is an example of
where the tooltip we're getting is quite
different from what dtslint is seeing.
>> Mike North: Where would the last
whitespace be, missing whitespace, 17:7.
>> Speaker 2: After the comma?
>> Mike North: Yes, that would be it.
There we go, finally.
If we had this as something different,
you would see.
I mean, this is an example of
a failure where it's like, I got this,
it should have been this.
So you could write a bunch of these with
the special ExpectType comments here,
and that would work nicely.
I mean, if it would work,
once you wrestle it into submission.
We're now gonna install tsd, and
it's comparatively much
easier to set up and use.
And we're gonna add some type-based
assertions just sort of at the bottom
of one of our just tests.
The downside here, of course, is we're not
gonna get the benefit of testing our types
against multiple different
compiler versions.
But it's perfectly good,
especially if you're dealing with an app.
And you don't need to be worried about
supporting different range of versions,
it can do just fine.
So I'm gonna make a quick git commit.
>> Mike North: Great, and then we're gonna
add a package to chat, yarn add -D tsd.
>> Mike North: And we're gonna go back
to our tests, in the utils folder,
for example.
We could just write,
let's deal with this date test here.
We can import  from 'tsd'.
And then here we can
write expectType<string>.
And then we can pass in our
formatTimestamp function here,
just getting rid of the extra syntax
at the end, another parenthesis.
And we expect this to be a string,
if it were a number we expected,
you can see that this will light up.
And so this serves as a nice
assertion to make sure
that things work the way
you would expect them to.
You'd usually use this to get a lot
of confidence around utility types or
type guards or things like that, where
a lot of generics are floating around.
And again, the point here is to catch
things that should not compile.
Your just tests,
the conventional tests that you would
write won't really help you with that.